You know, lately I've been wishing this for a lot of people.
I wish everyone had a strong family.
To teach and guide them
To love
And to love
Them personally
So I thought that today as we began 2016, we could talk about
Some of the most important practices for forging strong families.
and with God's help,
We're going to raise the quality of your family.
By helping you become a better family member.
What do you think about that? Amen?
these principles will help you be a more likable lovable and positive contributor not only to your family
But to your inner circle of friends,
As well as well.
even you terry.
I love you terry i don't see where you are but i love you
So I can't promise to save your family from sorrow, but if you take to heart these ideas,
I can promise that you will be a person who saves your family from a lot of pain because you will be a better family member. Does that make sense?
So let's take responsibility for our own selves, right?
Let's jump into this
Author David Carlson writes, "Recently a research project was conducted
in which about 240 counseling agencies across the country were asked to identify the primary problem that their counselors
Encountered
It was reported that almost 80
percent
Of the problems brought to the agencies concerning marriage and family.
life, excuse me.
Had to do with communication.
Communication.
So if communication is the number one problem for families, I want to tackle it.
Today,
Communication can be a very complex issue, can it?
93% of our communication comes not from our words, but from our words.
Where do you think that comes from?
Facial expressions.
Posture.
Vocal inflections.
Another non
Verbal cues.
I've discovered it's not so much that communication is difficult in the family today, but that it is lacking, right?
We don't do enough of this communication.
our author tim hansel suggests that if you're married you should spend at least fifteen minutes a day communicating with your spouse.
What do you think about that?
15.
Minutes a day
if this seems like a challenge dr willard harley suggests if you're married you should spend at least 15 hours a week
Communicating.
With your spouse.
What do you think about that?
This is how much time you spent while
Courting them is what Willard says.
So if you're going to stay in love,
you have to do the things that made you fall in love in the first place.
And most of the guys are going, oh, brother.
If I choose either time frame, probably both are better than most of us do.
right now and you end up with the same principle strong family members
Spend time
With each other.
Strong family members spend time with each other.
Many times we tend to concentrate on the things like on our to-do list, right?
I don't know one here ever does that
Ah.
We assume everyone around us is doing okay, don't we?
unless they take the initiative
Let us know otherwise and usually at that point it's
Uh,
Kind of a bad situation, isn't it?
So what this means, if you're going to be a strong member,
of a strong family you're going to have to find time to pay attention to the people
you love now our scripture for today
It shows us a great picture of this. So open up those Bibles again.
I don't know what's wrong with my
After nine.
Now, remember, this is a story of a man who was born blind.
And blind folks back then were unemployable.
So this man had spent his entire life.
Begging
Just listen to what Jesus does when he sees the man.
Right?
So here we are.
As he is walking along, he saw a man blind from birth.
As he was walking along, he saw.
a man blind from birth most people who read the story agree that it's a story demonstrating Jesus power and compassion but if you look a little deeper
Deeper, it's a story of how three different groups of people look at
at a blind man in three different ways. If we look at Jesus first,
It says, as he went along,
He saw a blind man.
From birth. I've read it three times now. Do you see maybe the point that I'm getting to? What's the first thing that Jesus did?
When he encountered the blind man.
He saw him.
Jesus actually looked
At him.
When the disciples looked at the man, they didn't really see a man, did they?
They saw a theology lesson.
His disciples asked him, "Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?"
Whose sin, this man or his parents?
that he was born blind. Now, in today's society, we tend to think of the disciples, the insignificant, right?
Because that's just not how we think in today's society. However, in that day and age,
Um,
It was believed that someone was born with a physical handicap
Their parents had sinned
And that sin had passed down to them.
That makes sense. I mean, you understand that, even if you don't agree with it, you understand.
So Jesus looked at the person and the disciples looked at the potential object lesson.
The third group of people was the man's neighbors. Now this was really interesting to me.
They never really saw this man at all.
When it boiled right down to it, they even wondered if they recognized the man. Have you ever thought about that?
the text doesn't tell us how old he was only that he was a man so the assumption is that he's a fully grown man people didn't move too often in that day so these
So these neighbors would probably live next to this man for years. Yeah.
Yet they had looked at him so infrequently.
That after he was healed, they weren't sure if he was their neighbor or not.
Now I know that none of us,
Are caught in that, are we?
they even had a little debate about it.
It was some saying he was and some saying he wasn't.
Even when he says, I am the man, these people aren't sure if he is or not.
Of all the people who encountered the blind man, only Jesus saw him.
Only Jesus paid attention to him. And it's an interesting phrase, isn't it? People's attention is so valuable.
That we attach a cost to it. Have you ever realized that?
Are you paying attention now?
Right?
Do you pay attention to who your neighbors are?
Do you pay attention who you walk by in the store?
so people's attention is so valuable that we attach a cost to it we don't do attention we don't make attention we
Pay attention.
And this is the first and very simplistic thing you need to do.
If you're going to be a strong
Family member.
You need to pay.
Attention.
Strong family members pay the price
To pay attention,
To each other.
It's both easy and hard to do.
i read once when franklin d roosevelt was president he got tired of smiling that big smile of his and saying the usual things at all these white house.
Cocktails and such.
so one evening he decided to find out whether anybody was really paying attention to him.
Some of you may have heard this story it's a true story
at the next reception each person came up to him with an extended hand he flashed his big smile and said i murdered my grandmother this morning
People would automatically respond with comments, "How nice!"
Keep doing the great things that you're doing.
Nobody listened to what he was saying except one foreign diplomat.
when the president said to him i murdered my grandmother this this morning.
The diplomat responded softly.
I'm sure she had it coming to her.
How often do we sit around the breakfast table reading the newspaper?
paper and tuning out everyone.
Around us
or spend evenings watching for instance blue bloods or whatever it is you watch or football while family members are growing up all around us.
Here's an idea. tomorrow morning, spend a few minutes looking out the window, appreciating what God has made for you.
And then turn around and spend a few minutes looking at your house at who?
God.
has made.
For you.
Really experience the pure joy of being in relationship with people.
Friends and family.
Those moments may turn out to be more enjoyable than any scene on TV.
And I'm sure we'll have a deeper plot.
And in verse 4 of this passage, Jesus says, as long as it is day, we must do the works of him who sent me. Amen.
What in the world does that mean?
I think Jesus is saying, "You...
You now have an extraordinary opportunity.
But the opportunity is limited.
Like the daytime, it's not going to last.
Forever.
It is possible
To miss the wonders taking place around you.
And most of those wonders have to do with the people you love.
I know there is work to be done.
But what's the point of being a family if we don't pay attention?
To each other.
One of my favorite memories is when Jamie and I took the boys and mom and dad to see the Harlem Globetrotters.
As I was growing up, I
um we would watch the harlem globetrotters on t v and i would hear over and over again dad talk about.
my grandpa playing against the harlem globetrotters in stanbury missouri.
And of course my first thought was what in the world
Where the harlem globetrotters doing in stanbury Missouri
but it's true and one of them just died not too long ago and the story of them being in stanbury.
came up.
Finally, a few years ago, we were able to fulfill a dream of dad's.
and take mom and dad.
to experience the Harlem Globetrotters.
when they were here in Kansas City.
Strong,
Family members.
Strong family members.
What is the first one?
Pay the price to pay attention to each other.
Second strong family members.
ask great questions read through other stories about jesus sometime and you'll see that he was not only a good speaker he was a great question asker.
And English teachers, I know that's correct.
He was a great question asker.
Just like better or more or whatever you said earlier.
Um.
Good er there it is yeah
And John, see what they remember?
In John 1, instead of focusing on himself, the Bible says he turned to the man following him and asked,
what do you want john chapter one thirty seven jesus says what do you want this might seem like an obvious question but how often do we ask those that we love.
of, what is it that you want?
not too long after that jesus was walking through the region of samaria and he came to a well and there was a woman getting water there and it was very awkward
Awkward for men and women to have conversation in that day.
And so Jesus broke the ice and said, will you give me water to drink? John 4:10.
Verse seven.
From that simple question, a great conversation.
began.
One chapter later, it says that Jesus was walking by a pool of water in Jerusalem when he came to a crippled man.
So we ask him a question.
Now, if you came across a crippled man sitting by a pool of water, what would you ask him?
Jesus starts with a simple,
Easy to answer question
John five.
12, verse 6.
Do you want to get well?
One chapter further, Jesus is teaching a large crowd on a hillside when he realizes that they're all getting hungry. And instead of just telling the disciples what to do, he asks them to do it.
He asked them a question in John 6:5, "Where shall we buy bread for these people to eat?"
Where shall we?
By bread for these people to eat.
Think through some of the best conversations you've ever had where you felt really connected
Connected to and know by the person you were talking with
I'm guessing the reason that the conversation went well is
And went deep,
Is because of good questions that were asked.
So let's talk about really communicating for a minute. I, I'd love you to write this down if you have your bulletin handy, and.
and you have a pen or pencil handy.
You know, you can ask questions about facts.
Right?
It's 40 degrees and sunny yesterday.
That probably doesn't start many conversations, does it?
It really doesn't connect us.
The second level is events. The Chiefs and the Bears played a great game last week.
From a chief's perspective,
A little more stimulating but nothing deep
is really exchanged. And the third level is about people.
Susie just had a facelift. Did you know that?
That could stir up some conversation, wouldn't it?
John hates politics
Bill got a new job.
These are much more engaging things, aren't they?
The four another level is ideas
I believe that Jesus Christ is God's Son and Savior of the world.
Say that to someone, and suddenly you've started a very stimulating conversation, right?
The conversation could go deep
The conversation can get heated
but ideas are exchanged and we share much more in that conversation about ourselves don't we?
And the deepest
Which probably guys are the worst at.
Our feelings.
I'm hurt.
I'm tired.
I'm happy, bored, jealous, excited.
this is where we live.
Yes, guys, even us.
And it takes a great woman.
To see that.
This is where it gets deep.
So a good question to ask a loved one when they describe a fact or an event or a person,
or idea is, well how do you feel about that?
How do you feel about that?
Can you see how that communication is complex?
But it's really an easy question to ask, isn't it?
How do you feel about that?
The most engaging people you know are people who are good at asking
Questions.
When's the last time that you asked a waitress or a waiter
How's your day going?
How do you feel?
You would be surprised what they will do for you.
Because they know that you care.
But again, do you ask the question because of what they'll do for you?
You ask the question because you
All right.
so.
Strong family members pay the price to pay attention.
Strong family members ask great questions.
Facts, events, people, ideas and feelings. Strong family members know that loving means
I'm sure you've heard the saying, God gave us two ears and one mouth because we should listen twice as much as we should listen.
As
We speak.
Ha ha ha ha ha
I just got in trouble there if you didn't notice that
one of the greatest verses on the family in the entire bible is james one verse nineteen which says my dear brothers and sisters take note of this.
Everyone should be
Quick to listen
Slow to speak
and slow to become angry you all know that don't you?
yeah.
Everyone should be what?
Quick to listen
Slow to speak
Slow to become angry. Notice the one quick and two slows. Be quick to listen.
How often do we speak so quickly that we don't even listen to the end of your friends'
Comment
we immediately get that defense going right and and we're already thinking about how we're going to respond and we really don't even listen.
To what their concern or statement is.
Be quick to listen.
slow to speak and slow to become angry sometimes we're so focused on what we think that we forget to think about the other person in their situation
Listening to another person talk about their feelings is a great gift of love.
A great,
Gift of love.
All right, strong family members, communicate love through healthy touch.
Years ago, in a classic work called People Making, psychologist Virginia Sutter said that it takes eight meaningful, healthy touches a day to maintain
To maintain mental health.
And 12 healthy touches a day to grow.
Sometimes the best way to communicate love is to put your hand on someone's shoulder.
Or touch their hand or elbow or depending on their comfort level rub their back
Maybe your kids?
If you turn to Mark 1 with me.
Matthew Mark. It's the second book in the New Testament.
Mark chapter one.
It's a story about when Jesus meets a man with leprosy, Mark chapter 1.
Verse 40.
A man with leprosy came to him and begged him on his knees.
If you are willing
You can make me clean.
Jesus was indignant.
He reached out his hand and touched the man. I am willing, he said.
Be clean.
Jesus touched the man and then...
He healed them,
A man came with leprosy, came to him and begged him on his knees. If you are willing, you can make me clean, and Jesus was indignant. He reached out his hand and touched the man.
I am willing be made.
Clean.
I want you to think about this a minute. from the day that he contracted leprosy,
He had not had,
Most likely, any one ever touch him.
He'd know no physical human contact.
Jesus knew the man needed touch more than anything else.
So at the risk of contracting leprosy himself, Jesus touched the man while he was still sick.
And then he healed him.
You see, Jesus understood the power of
Of touch.
So just real quick today, I'm going to suggest some things to you.
As we begin working on improving the quality of our families.
And I want you to write these down.
Write these down.
It's kind of a family assignment, you might say.
Family assignment. it doesn't matter if you're family. if you're not married and all the kids are gone, you have friends that are close to you. you have people that you quilt with or eat with.
Or eat lunch with all these people.
It can be from literal core family to friends to business associates.
Depending on their comfort level
So here we go family assignment number one
Spend some time
Paying attention to every member of your family each day.
It's not always going to be possible.
It's kind of like, in this way, it's kind of like coming to church,
We know that coming to worship every Sunday most likely for most people is not going to be likely 52 times a year.
Right?
But if you're here most of the time and you have to be gone,
It's not that big a deal, is it?
Right?
In the grand scheme of things, yeah, you'll miss it and all that, right?
Well it's the same way in in most of these principles if you do it all the time and then one day it doesn't happen it's not going to be a big life-changing event you understand what i'm saying
You understand what I'm saying?
right it is a way of life
and so therefore if something happens and you're traveling or you can't um pay attention to that particular family member in a day that's.
That's fine. I'm sure though when you go to bed you're going to be thinking, "Oh,
I never spent any time with so-and-so today.
because it's a habit so spend some time paying attention to every family every member of the family each day
How about starting with 60 seconds per day?
60 seconds per day
Can you do that?
60 seconds per day?
if it's more than you're doing now that's that's a great improvement isn'
If that's less than you already do, try to up the ante a little bit, right?
Whatever you do, try to take a step forward. Number two.
Ask at least one good question every day.
Become an expert at this.
Ask at least one good question a day and you can guess what's next.
After you ask a good question, what do you have to do?
Listen!
Listen a lot and speak a little.
Listen a lot.
Speak,
A little.
And after uh
Years of marriage, I've learned guys that sometimes you don't have to respond.
Sometime a hug is the best response.
Right?
4. Develop a habit of healthy touching.
You notice I put healthy there.
I didn't want anybody to get the wrong idea. This is both a... It takes communication to understand healthy touch, right?
like you know i i hug a lot of you as you leave right but i can tell when you're walking up to me what you're comfortable with.
Right?
And you have to be able to understand your family member and what they're comfortable.
With.
Every time I have a chance, I touch my boys.
Right?
I pat him on the back.
i squeeze their shoulder right.
some touches they don't like so well you know if they're doing something you know like mom used to do tight little hairs on the back of their neck you know.
no but every time i try to touch them in some way just rough up their hair or depends on if i'm feeling ornery or not right anything to show.
to show my love for them.
Touch
First thing in the morning, touch before you leave the house, touch when you get home. You know that's three touches.
Right?
To get to eight, you're going to have to dig a little deeper on that, aren't
To get to 12, you're going to have to work just a little bit.
like you know maybe this is an important thing.
For you and your family.
it doesn't have to be a big deal just touch and finally
Finally, every Sunday ask, "What did you learn today?"
On your way home over lunch,
What did you learn today?
what did you learn in sunday school?
What did you learn?
In service.
How can you put shoes on that?
And live that out.
All right, so spend more time paying attention. I want to make sure you get these down, all right?
Spend some time paying attention.
Just open your eyes and pay attention.
Two.
Ask at least one good question every day.
Three, listen a lot and speak a little.
Four.
Develop a habit of healthy touching
And five,
Every Sunday ask what did you know?
Learn.
Today.
Did you receive this today?
Let's put it in practice. Amen.
Let's pray.
Dear God, we love you so much. We thank you.
For the.
Well, we just thank you for each other.
and we're sorry lord that sometimes we just assume that we're all okay.
We're sorry that we think we don't.
Have time to listen.
We're sorry that uh
The fact that you created each one of us
And so many times we think that the other person isn't
Important.
So we asked the lord um
On this epiphany Sunday
On this Sunday where it's the first Sunday of 2016,
I just ask that you challenge us, Lord, to do these things so that we can become strong family members. Amen.
So that we can make a difference in our family.
Love one another more and deeper.
It's in Jesus' name that we pray. Amen
And all of God's people said,
Amen.